we were going to start with the public
hearing and then go to the regular
meeting oh all right you didn't want to
open the meeting
first no that's that's normally not how
we've uh done it okay apologies not a
problem so the purpose of the public
hearing is to discuss the application of
William Genevie property located at 517
Route Six the applicant is Seeking a
special permit for restoration of the
Gravel Pit in accordance with section 16
of the zoning
regulations uh in uh so right off the
bat I'm
a a little surprised uh last month Mr
geneves asked for an extend mention to
this month because uh he couldn't attend
nor could his
attorney um and I see we're in the
same
predicament
now and so Allan I guess uh you know it
it seems to me as if we
have nobody present to discuss the
application I'm sure the realtor might
have some information about potential
sales or or something like that but as
far as uh answering questions on the
application
um yeah well the the the sale is
certainly an important factor to be
considered but you know the the gist of
the public hearing is on the application
and how it proposes to modify the
pending remediation plan also depending
on the
facts you know there may be a question
as to who is the proper person to be um
presenting the application if there is a
pending I I mean I saw the email that
was circulated and there was talk of a
buyer uh being willing to do certain
things but um you know if there is a
pending contract for the sale of the
property that calls into
question who who should be the applicant
um you know at at the time a real estate
contract is signed then uh you know at
that point the seller almost becomes an
equitable custodian of the property and
the real person in interest becomes the
buyer and so I I haven't I don't know
whether there's a a
sale uh for the property been signed I
don't know I can I can answer that and
yes it has been signed for several weeks
now um it's supposed to close but I
don't think we're going to meet the
closing day August 30th because there's
a lot of nuances with the contract so
it's in conjunction with the endover
auto pars business next door to it okay
thank you
um
well Jim um yes how on I I know I
emailed you about the calendar when was
the application deemed received and I
know we already
extended the public
hearing 30 days once 30 days well I'm
assuming that was the the extension I
didn't see it in the I I looked after I
got your email it was accepted in June
the application was accepted in June
well we've we've opened we've opened the
public hearing right I've went I went
through the timeline
today in the it
was received at the June meeting which I
don't recall the date right now but I
counted the days were allowed 65 days to
hold a public hearing and today is day
64 yeah we extended it to this this date
at the request of the applicant yeah but
we really don't need an extension at at
this point because we are within the 65
day window well we've we've now opened
the public hearing correct yes it is all
right well all right well once the
public hearing is open you have 35 days
to close the public hearing and but that
period can also be extended with the
balance of the 65 days that um we
haven't used up yet so um in my current
state of ignorance about what's going on
um my thought would be and it's it's a
suggestion that um we we immediately
continue the public hearing until next
month and in the meantime we need to
sort out and frankly the buyer and
seller have to sort out um you know
who's going to pursue this application
if it's going to be
pursued um we need to look at the
contract for sale for purchase
um to determine who the real party in
interest is I mean most of the time most
of the time it's the purchaser and
perhaps the purchaser might be the more
appropriate person to pursue the
application in which case we'd have to
substitute the purchaser for the for the
seller now they may between the two of
them they may not want to do that um you
know the purchaser may not want to take
that on uh Mr genovisi might not want to
let that go so at this point I got a
bunch of unknowns um we don't have
anyone
here for the uh current applicant who
can represent him in a legal capacity so
I think under all of the circumstances J
unless you see another way through this
I think the proper thing to do would be
to continue the
hearing um until next month and in the
meantime we got to sort all this out
so I mean I I'm fine with that and I can
take that all back to bill and his
attorney um the buyers were wondering um
they do want this resolved before the
sale is done um and and the buyer and
seller have actually been talking to
each other and I talked with their agent
Tammy today they are open and they did
put it in writing which the zoning
office has that they would be open to
another option other than top soil but I
understand there's regulations so um
they did say suggest something like a
mill or something to put on the property
versus two inches of top soil I don't
know if that's an option or not but well
we're getting ahead of ourselves like I
said we have to sort out who's going to
be presenting The Proposal that you just
uh okay I understand I hear you I'll
bring that back okay Hy yeah I just
wanted to to say I apologize for the
confusion but I mean I hadn't heard from
anybody until this afternoon and then
there was a flurry of phone
calls so I did you don't have to Jim no
apology necessary uh this uh we we're
all uh we're all laboring under the same
disadvantage so you don't need to
apologize for
anything agent Hy
his if you received a check for the
application fee I I have
not yes and I just heard this today too
and I brought that back late this
afternoon to Bill but he said he didn't
pay it yet because he wasn't sure if he
actually really needed to pay it if it
was just going to be top soil and you
know that's just what he told me so I'm
just bringing that back well I I will
let him know that he needs to pay it
yeah well again you really shouldn't be
telling them anything in that regard but
you know I you know you can certainly
talk to your real estate client but Ju
Just for just for general information
the application fee is the fee that's
paid to have the application go forward
it has nothing to do with whether the
application is going to be granted
denied or anything in between so um yeah
if you submit an application
the the application has to be
accompanied by the application filing
fee um frankly the commission has
extended quite a courtesy to Mr genovesi
in proceeding this far with the
application without having the fee in
hand I mean they have the opt they have
the option to do that but they're
certainly under no obligation to do it
okay
understood so attorney curto would uh I
I I heard your recommendation to
continue the public hearing at the next
meeting which uh we can certainly do my
uh my question
is should we consider that we don't have
a valid
application in
rejected I think it's this point
um I I think it's this at this point it
would be better for all the parties
concerned to get a resolution on this
one way or the other because if we if we
reject the application um the best thing
I can see happening is someone files a
new one and maybe it's Mr genovesi again
or maybe it's the buyer the the problem
there or the disadvantage to that is
going to kick this can further down the
road which I don't
think neither the buyer nor the seller
nor frankly us want to have happen so I
agree with that statement absolutely so
I I think all things considered the best
thing to do would be to have someone pay
the fee and just continue I mean there's
a lot of things you could do if if just
speaking very hypothetically if if the
application were approved in some
fashion
with some uh you know some proposal you
could condition the special permit
modification on the receipt of the
filing fee you could
also frankly you could also wave the fee
in the interest of not not that not at
all that I'm suggesting that you could
even wave the fee um I've seen it done
usually it's for circumstances having to
do with hardship or other things but and
not this but no you have a fair amount
of latitude with the fee the point is
that it it should be it should be paid
for this to
proceed Alan if if we're on day 63 of
the 65 days
ofed do we not we need a request for an
extension keep well no because we've
opened the public hearing so we're now
on a different clock we're we're now the
the public hearing is open so we have
that's all right that's all right Jim um
so we have 35 days now to close it but
we can use the
balance of the 65 day total extension to
extend the public hearing but we're not
there yet got
it okay well um
certainly it's disappointing to
me to walk into
the start of the public hearing with all
this information that's been available
for several weeks now and being the
first that we've heard about
it but given
that I do intend to continue the public
hearing until our next meeting
and the commission needs to have some
time to understand the facts of the
matter that we don't have coming into
the meeting
tonight
before we can have a successful
continuation of the public
hearing it it's just disappointing I
know agent Hy has been trying to get
information on what is going on and he
has been unsuccessful and it seems like
there's a lot of stuff out
there that we should have known
about
um yeah and to that I would only add
that um it's certainly not not on on Jim
that the the information is not
available to us because I know he's been
trying and I also and I'll also add that
that Jim
Jim did the uh the posting of the sign
and the mailing of a butter letters uh
none of which he was obligated to do but
uh at my suggestion just to keep
everything proper he took on
those uh extra activities too so um I I
think I think he should be given credit
for that and I think it should be known
that he's done those things to try to
move this thing along
and in fact it did cost the
time Mr Fitch you cut out if you were
trying to say something yeah I mean I
don't know if it's public comment um but
I mean I'm sure it did cost a postal
stamp to send these out and it seems
like you've guys gotten blown off a few
times
now Okay so so at this point um and
Allan uh I don't think that I'm required
to go through public comments or any of
that stuff because we didn't no no you
can uh you can open you can open the
public hearing and immediately continue
it you don't have to you don't have to
proceed with any particular portion of
it so at time 7:18 we will continue the
public
hearing at our next meeting
and uh oh before you do that Jed yep
hold on one second Simone are you still
here yes I am listening to it all okay
great um let me ask you this while I got
you
sure the there is a pending contract for
the sale of the property
yes it it may be necessary to review
that to sort out these issues of who
should be the applicant now yeah I wrote
that down I'm going to take that back
yeah I don't know um I don't know how
the buyer and or the seller feel about
uh disclosure of this contract I will
ask them about that as well I mean I I
mean it could come into this as an
exhibit but then it's open to the public
it's not just open to the commission
right sometimes people are sensitive
about that sort of thing yeah I that go
ahead no no I I I know exactly what
you're saying I agree with that I'd have
to get obviously their input on both of
them we did have initial conversations
today because I honestly just found out
about this public hearing tonight and I
advise my client that somebody should
attend and why I'm here and we already
talked about that but anyways I'm GNA
take all this back um get him to pay the
fee um and the discussion I had today
with the buyer agent um early
discussions and we wanted to learn more
from tonight so um is that they're going
to want this resolved before we close so
right now I think that the applicant
based off that discussion will still be
Bill Jes but I'm going to take it back
and um you know that may or may not
change but for now they they were their
stance was to get it resolved before we
close yeah and understand uh for for
what I said before this is all this is
all fact evidence you're giving me and
and nothing further by way of advocacy
on top of the buyer on behalf of the
buyer because I or the seller because I
haven't heard you say anything the in
the um manner of ADV advocacy so we're
all good okay okay sorry Jed nope so the
date of the next meeting is September
17th and the public hearing will be
continued prior to the start of the
regular meeting at 7 o'clock on the
17th okay Jed did you want me to stick
around for the rest of the meeting um
not necessary at this point Allan but
please put the 17th on your calendar for
next month yeah you know I may uh I may
be out of town that day um I it's it's
setting off an alarm Bell in my head um
I may have to find um someone from my
firm to stand in for me um but that
shouldn't be a problem because we have a
very deep bench as you
know yes yeah I I'll I'll keep informed
about that okay thank you Ellen you're
welcome I'm going to drop off but I
appreciate you guys listening to me and
I'm gonna take it all back okay all
right thanks hope I wasn't hope I wasn't
too hard on you no no I completely
understand thank you take care bye bye
bye all right guys I'll night good night
take
care okay it is time 7:22
and I will call the regular meeting of
the Andover Planning and Zoning
commission to
order first up is a roll call and
seating of
alternates and I saw an CR present
Scott Leanne
Hutchinson and
myself I see two alternates an Marie
dagel and Susan England and if my memory
serves me correct next up in the
rotation is Susan because Ian Marie had
been a uh alternate
recently so Susan I'm going to sit you
for the vacant position on the
commission there five members in the
commission five three so there's
one next up our additions and changes to
the
agenda and I have none does anybody else
have any additions or changes to the
agenda that we need to make I do item 8B
is uh to it says on the agenda to
receive application I would have lik to
have said U to set public hearing as
well that's for the soccer field fail
fail soccer field so you have an
application
yes I
do when did you get that got the
application
today and I did receive a I picked up a
check this evening at the
fields so I do have that check
okay oh
Jim I am going to uh say that we need
no well okay I got it
um so under additions or changes the EV
agenda I make a motion that under new
business
8B for the soccer club we add the words
and set public
hearing looking for a second to the
motion I second that thank you Susan any
discussion okay I'll call for a vote an
I go hi
Leanne hi Susan I and I vote I as well
the motion passes
50000 okay item four public comment
limited to items not on the evening's
agenda
um anybody from the
public have any comments before we
start okay hearing
none I'll move on to item five which is
old
business shoot Jim I uh I guess it's a a
good thing the uh public hearing went
the way it did I see we didn't put the
uh
Gravel Pit no no I I sent you an email
to that effect but I decided not to
mention it see okay well point you you
did good um anyhow first up on is the
discussion of the plan of conservation
and
development and uh I'm going to turn
that over to
John okay uh thanks Jed good evening
everyone
um the uh I've distributed I believe
last week for people's review um a draft
of a PowerPoint
presentation um that we would uh propose
to go through at a public information
session um to basically catch the public
up to where we are in our current our
current process as well as letting
people know what exactly a plan of
conservation and development is what
it's for um and what what is going into
it and um as part of that we would go
over three main sections uh of progress
to date first being the basic
demographic um section that that we
reviewed on this commission probably six
or seven months ago um just you know
housing demographics population
demographics aging income jobs um and
then going through the uh tentative
results of or the results to date of the
public uh input
survey um of which we have currently
received um let's
see over 230 responses which I think is
pretty good um so we would go over that
data um and then the last thing would be
to talk through the vision statement
that we' worked on for a couple of
months as well as as um how the vision
statement breaks down into the the
sections of the plan that we will be
writing basically from the point of the
public information session forward um so
essentially it's to get people up to up
to speed on the plan itself what it's
for and where we are in the process um
I'm happy to buzz through um you've seen
a lot of the stuff before because we did
the demographic section and we went
through the results of the survey when
we had I don't know maybe 150 responses
or so and and the response you know um
Tendencies haven't haven't changed that
much um but I I did send it out so
people could get a sense of of what we
were proposing to
present um so I'll I'll stop there I can
I can share briefly the the PowerPoint
if you'd like but but hopefully people
got a chance to take a look and I'd be
happy to uh talk through any any
comments or questions people had
I would like to go through it John it
you know certainly we don't need to to
take a lot of time on the vision
statement in in the the last couple
things that we spent in depth at at the
last meeting but as I went through I had
uh several
comments and uh and that sort of thing
um before you start though I would like
to point out that in the
agenda it said we were looking
September 21st is the tenative date as I
recall when we looked at the calendars
uh that was really September 12th right
Thursday the 12th not not Saturday the
21st yes so anyhow
um please proceed okay all right so as I
as I stated uh again we're gonna sort of
review the three major components thus
far the demographics survey and results
survey results and and the vision
statement um talking a little bit about
again catching people up to speed
because this is ideally a a generic Town
public audience not not um made up of of
Commissioners like yourself necessarily
that just talks a little bit about what
the plan of conservation and development
is coming from a state statutory mandate
uh and and then some of the items that
are required to be considered public
health Recreation Social Services
affordable housing cluster development
uh Energy Efficiency and that sort of
thing to kind of go through the the the
quick checkbox of items to
consider um talk about why it's it's
important um because it can be used in a
number of ways particularly and
something this is something that we've
done um in the relatively recent past
reviewing of Municipal improvements to
make sure that the town is making
Investments or divestments that that are
advancing the goals of the planet
conservation and development um and in
that similar way to support uh Grant
applications and to basically support
attempts to to implement the
recommendations of the plan um both in
in you know um state and federal funding
particularly um those funds frequently
follow plans um looking at zoning
regulation amendments which again should
uh represent uh an implementation and a
and a philosophical harmony with the
goals of the plan of conservation and
development so for inance
if you're looking to increase housing
density in a certain area of town the
zoning the zoning changes should should
reflect that as well um and then
basically being kind of like the
philosophical statement of of where are
we headed and how are we intending to
get there um so present in a little bit
more detail to the public um
that and then talking a little bit about
how um aside from that broad guidance
about what a plan is supposed to be
municipalities have broad latitude to
come up with the plan and and and Define
their own process so I just sort of want
to explain how Andover is doing that
this time um leading leading through the
committee of the whole Planning and
Zoning is didn't did not set up a
separate ad hoc committee or anything
like that it's being done in this group
uh again with support from myself with
support from uh
Eric looking at where we've come from
the 2015 plan how we've changed as a as
a as a a community um comparing
contrasting with what the where the
state is um heading and where the
capital region is heading um and then
and then some of the nitty-gritty of
what we're actually doing again the
community survey taking a look at the
town's existing plans whether that's the
the um uh the town's uh investment the
major investments plan um you know open
space plan the the um affordable housing
plan and then the the part that will
sort of follow the public information
session which is those in-depth uh
discussions with stakeholder groups not
only Town staff folks from you know
public works like Jim uh you know land
use staff like Jim as well as folks from
conservation and open space groups Land
Trust hop River um and then Economic
Development and other and other
commissions to have those sort of
in-depth conversations about the the
specific topics um at
hand and then going through um the the
demographics um that we reviewed and
I'll I'll buzz through this very quickly
uh talking through population where we
where we are from an ethnic um an ethnic
breakdown um you know again unsurprising
the the great majority um nearly 90% of
the town is non-hispanic white with sort
of a scattering of of various um other
ethnic
groups and then also comparing and over
with the with Connecticut as a whole
talking a little bit about where our
population is going not only
historically over the last 10 years
shrinking a little bit um and again the
numbers are relatively small we've you
know lost maybe 150 population over over
10 years um and then and then where it's
projected uh again and and and focusing
on the fact that this is not written in
stone and a lot can change um
particularly even when the population
projections were done we want to
reinforce that the population
projections were done um somewhere
between uh 2015 and 2020 um and you know
at the time those were done let's say
2017 2018 obviously no one saw covid
coming and no one saw you know the
different different housing Trends
necessarily so the the population Trends
uh aren't certainly locked in locked in
stone and and and can
evolve on that one John uh yes you know
one of the things that I wrestled with
you we were coming through all this
stuff is how s how bigger problem is the
declining population Trend or maybe not
at all but one of the things that I
think is really key that I'd like some
thought on how to highlight you have the
2023 population there of
3160 and so you know over the course of
the last three years the population has
not gone down at all it's either stayed
the same or gone up just a little bit
and and that really you know is counter
to the what's uh you know a fairly
significant drop off in calculation that
the projections go so I think that's a
big deal that uh you know we're not
going down right this minute I think
that's great news yeah and I think I
think you know and and again as I said
that could be well you know number one
that could be just that the projections
miscalculated and and these are small
numbers um because they were it wasn't
projected to drop off significant L but
um that also could be a reflection of Co
you know of um people sticking around or
or you know sticking around Andover when
they might otherwise have have moved um
some people moving into Andover because
of you know the the perception of of
crowding in in larger cities
um yeah I mean it could it could be a
variety of those factors but you know
again in it with relatively small
numbers these small factors can make a
make a difference well that that you
know small
number sort of took that off my concern
chart you know that was that was a big
concern to me and I'm saying maybe not
we we uh too early to declare Doom and
Gloom
and I think that you know that was
great um good point I we I'll we
certainly highlight that um looking a
little bit at the demographics uh again
noting that uh even more so so that you
can see the the population Trends the
demographic Trends is that
um and over like much of Connecticut is
aging and and as you see the the darker
lines the the the the higher bars seem
to be migrating to the right so so
Andover seems to be Aging in place um
which is which is a common thing to
Connecticut however it being common
doesn't necessarily mean that it's not
an issue and we don't need to Grapple
with it it certainly it's c certainly is
something to Grapple with as as more and
more of our population as a percentage
is is aging into the senior um cohorts
well and on that slide I think it's
worth uh highlighting the fact that you
know the under five years is actually
starting to increase a little bit you
know is probably twice the amount that
we've got in the five to nine years and
so yeah it it
certainly says something about what the
future Elementary School and eventually
you know I don't know if that trend's
going to continue but the elementary
school population's not going to be
going down anytime
soon going so I I thought that was a
good news
piece Eric would probably disagree with
me because he John John I have a
question to 45 to
54 yeah your classes 18% of the
population 45 to
54 did I read that oh yeah but yeah
that's there's something wrong there um
because the number above it is 12% yeah
yeah and that that number above it
should be more like 20 if the bar is
accurate yeah let me that's thank you uh
let me let me
verify what that should be well it's
it's so total residents you're you're
just over 600 so that yeah that is about
20% so that yeah that I think probably
21 instead of 12 it's probably just
invert maybe okay looking at the graph
off to the right of it all right could
be 21
yeah okay yep it is from an an
affordability standpoint
certainly it does see if the the trends
we're seeing now um in Pre K hold um
we're in for an incredible tax rise in
the town um because education drives are
overall cost
so do what you can to convince people
not to have
children
just smaller vibrant
households um okay uh so then going on
again household size um and over
household size has actually been
remarkable stable uh and I think that
that reflects um the sort of good good
family Town nature of
Andover um is is you know population um
household size is declining generally
speaking and particularly in Connecticut
as a whole um but Andover has been
remarkably stable um but household sizes
do tend to be relatively small if you
combine one and two person households
you're looking at over 60% uh um you
know getting on two-thirds of the
population um lives in one or two person
households so that's that's a that's a
way in
which you could
see
population uh stagnation or even even
slight decline but no real demand loss
in terms of uh housing units largely
because we have smaller you know we we
there's a there's a smaller number of
people in the same amount of households
um so that's something to to certainly
look out for and and um plan for as as
people are looking to to
downsize so John you just said you said
smaller number of people in the same
number of households and I agree the
number of houses in Handover has stayed
about the same over the last 20 years
there hasn't been a lot of building but
if the population's gone down over the
last 20 years I don't know how that 2.64
number can stay the same it it's yeah
and I think I I I what I really meant to
refer to is is sort of the the overall
Trends we've seen in Connecticut not
necessarily andover's very specific
condition but still if our population's
gone down and the number of houses have
stayed the same yeah well then then that
number that means that average number
would
change yeah and again we haven't seen
that that that's but that was just
uh a that was a American Community
survey number from uh four years ago now
now yeah I not to not to dis discredit
that but yeah it's that's your math is
correct
Jen
okay okay I'll think about that because
you know when we go yeah talk to the
public about the
presentation I would like to at least
have made sense to me before we get
there sure and I'm I yeah I think I'm
I'm kind of free associating from some
of these these data points and not
necessarily focusing it entirely on
Andover I was that one I was kind of
referring to a a larger the larger
Statewide trend of of reducing household
size numbers um so I'll I'll make a note
to to focus on the on the Andover
numbers more
specifically um median household income
again Andover doing relatively well even
even relative to our um cohort in talin
County uh solid ,000 average household
um income over the state average um I'm
sorry State
median and then the the chart in the
lower the map in the lower left um is an
immigration out migration for
employment um so there there the number
of jobs in Andover is relatively small
there's there's only about 350 jobs um
that was part of the survey in Andover
um the great majority of uh those jobs
are filled by people coming into Andover
and most of the people um of working age
in Andover are leaving um the town for
for employment over 1500 are leaving so
only um as the time that that survey um
which I believe was a 2020 um only only
about 70 people were both living and
working in Andover it's basically Eric
and 68 of his closest friends
in my in a comment on the uh the median
household
income
um I know when we did
our affordable housing presentation I
think I thought the
median came in at 108 and that could
have been from year 2022 or something uh
you know yeah that could have been and
it's also it also um yeah it it draws
from a couple of different sources and
some of the medians are drawn from
certain household sizes so you know they
they take a a two and a half person
household versus versus the the you know
the total income and total number of
households so it you have to make sure
that you're doing an Apples to Apples
but but yeah um this is that's taken
from this is taken from HUD I believe
the 2020 number
yep uh and and again low low very low
unemployment um in and over although
very low very low employment numbers
period um but but the jobs in endover
are generally filled um so after after
looking at some of the demographics we
we wanted to talk about um seeking
public input and so I threw up our the
ad that was um in the um River East uh
encouraging people to to participate uh
in the online survey which was on Survey
Monkey we also had a number of um hard
copies available at Town Hall and at the
senior center uh and the
library and um so we've got the over 230
responses the the survey is still open
um there is still time to to fill it out
but uh at this point we we haven't had
any any real earthquakes of of new
directions that that um participants
have have
determined um most most folks uh live in
Andover as we saw with the with the
immigration out migration map um living
in Andover work
elsewhere um or living in Andover and
are retired those are the the the by far
the plurality of participants in the
survey um we have uh we talked about
Economic Development priorities um the
in this case the the the longer bands um
represent a higher priority um so more
retail along Route Six was the highest
priority along with restaurants and
medical services or services and medical
offices on Route 6 were the three most
popular um responses followed by small
and homebased businesses visitor based
businesses at growing existing um small
businesses the the least popular was no
major changes I think everyone most
everyone recognized that there was
opportunity for growth and I think
particularly along Route Six hey two
comments on that John and uh you know
the words at the top say priorities
from one being the top priority to seven
being the lowest so with those words up
there I would almost think that the most
that most people thought that the
highest priority was no changes in
business right so yeah when when the
data is displayed and I can explain this
I can well I can either take out the I I
put the questions in there because that
was that as the questions actually
appeared on the survey y um but when we
did the data View
um we we in inverted the calculation so
that that the longer bars would would
represent the most more popular
answers and and the the second comment
would be I had the misconception that
more businesses were going to be an
economic boom for Handover and I think
you know other people probably thought
that too and when Eric described how
little tax benefit you know the average
taxpayer got from having the Dollar
General out there I I was quite
surprised so if if the people in the
town think that our tax bills going to
go down because we get a couple of
restaurants or something U that's that's
not going to be the case you know we're
gonna we're going to increase the tax
revenue by getting more housing in hand
over yeah I that's that I think that's a
really worthwhile point and this is
something that I know I know Eric has
some of the the numbers at his
fingertips on I don't know if this is
jet during the actual presentation if
you want to pause and kind of have that
discussion here I mean we certainly
didn't include
any fiscal indications um in the in the
question itself the question itself was
really meant to be kind of like what's
what's missing you know where what
should we be growing you know not really
any tax implications but I it's that's a
very good point to make to you know uh
indicate that you know a couple of
retail destinations or a couple of
restaurants is not going to be a a tax
Panacea yep just my comment and and my
dialogue with you uh is primarily so
that I better understand what what it is
that we're going through sure so I can
help explain
it right I mean I guess my takeaway and
and I looked at that pretty extensive ly
because you know everybody said to me
you know you need all this Economic
Development you need
businesses and to make a you know a a
10% decrease in town taxes means
something like $35 Generals in the town
of Ando it's a really big number um you
know or $40 Generals in the town of
Andover or 45 gas stations I I mean that
there are some
industries by virtue of what they have
for
equipment um can provide a reasonably
big boost for a small
footprint but at the same time the state
of Connecticut has given a manufacturing
tax
break um that reduces a lot of the
things that traditionally would have uh
you know been able to generate a lot of
tax
Revenue so you're left with things that
are essentially kind of really
unpopular that would make a big
difference like you know the infusion
station would have made a noticeable
difference in town tax hugely unpopular
a trash to energy plant would make a
huge dent in town taxation incredibly
unpopular so so we're not getting out of
that without
kind of a major transformation of the
town and thinking that we're going to do
something significant to lower
residential taxes the only real way to
lower residential taxes is provide
residents less service um and you got to
make your decision you know where you
want to fall on that
Spectrum I think one of the things that
that we can try to educate the public on
is that with the little bit of tax help
we certainly don't want to
jeopardize the the pastorial views that
you have driving down Route 6 through
and over to put up a bunch of economic
development in the hopes that it's going
to lower the taxes um I would never want
to lose you know those Farms we have out
on Route Six and I think it's just uh a
very beautiful view for people as you're
driving through the town
okay so yeah I mean there's there's
there's obviously a lot of the tradeoffs
to consider tax revenues and and
Community views and that sort of thing
um going through uh further more of the
survey looking at housing opportunities
housing options again um this is uh for
whom are housing options
needed um most and and the most popular
answers um are we seniors and downsizers
and and particularly young families um a
relatively small minority uh less than
25% stated that we don't really need
more housing um so I do think there is a
recognition in town that uh some more
housing options are needed and and I
think accurately reflects the um the
demographics
um and the the Aging of the
population so so the question I have for
the commission
is what kind of housing do we think is
most appropriate for the young
families
yeah and we we get into this a little
bit in the next question yep and and
so that leads into the next question I
know but um you know far and away we all
like single family houses and is that
going to get the young families here and
I think again if we built the small
houses like used to build um you know
the young professionals that probably be
in the duplexes or or something like
that but Chad can I make a comment say
again can I make a comment Who's Who is
Andreas yeah go ahead Andreas yeah so um
I think you know my wife is a real
estate attorney um and we you know I've
noticed that small houses are a lot more
desirable um for families young families
especially
uh for affordability reasons and for um
a sense of a little bit of privacy right
duplex says you're right I work at Pratt
Whitney most of the Millennials and genz
going into apartment complexes so on so
forth um as as a person with two young
second you know two young kids second
one on the way we chose Andover and
moved here into a single family house
because of the privacy and the quiet
quiet and the and the country setting of
this town that's what we looking for
that's what we looked for that's what we
were searching for and I think a a lot
of young families are are in the same
boat people people want to invest they
they want duplexes you
know that's like New Britain kind of
thing you know and I think for the
retirees a small lot small house small
maintenance yes small tax uh that's what
I would be looking for 50 and
over so anyhow I I
think the the data on the slide points
to
uh the answer for
us okay and so yeah as as Jen said the
the by far the most popular answers were
single family which is obviously the the
established character of the town
established history of settlement and
then adding single family with accessory
apartments and then to a lesser extent
town houses and duplexes you know
obviously people didn't not perceive and
over as a as a community very different
from what it is already so you know
three family four Family Apartments and
that sort of thing was not was not as as
popular um then we started asking some
questions uh also about Community
resilience and sustainability similar to
the way we asked about um new businesses
in town where again the top priorities
on this are inverted to reflect um the
longer bars
um and so of the of the resilience and
sustainability items upgrading the
town's roads Bridges culverts um to
reflect you know increased storm
frequency and intensity um similar to
the ones that we saw out in Western
Connecticut this week um was the most
popular answer and the rest were kind of
clustered around um kind of kind of
Middle Ground um upgrading power and
data infrastructures making sure our our
road network is um friendly to the bikes
and pedestrians were common although
certainly not not as popular as as the
the key is of our bridges and Roads and
culverts um and then talking about
natural resources in a very similar way
asking people to rank their priorities
again longer bars are higher priorities
for more
respondents um focusing on Trails um
that you know connecting um different
areas of town and different communities
was the most popular uh followed you
know by Andover Lake water quality
stewardship and management of existing
Open Spaces as opposed to acquiring more
um as well as investing in active
Recreation slightly fewer people um
wanted to invest in more open space uh
for Passive Forest Farms um and then um
fewer still said upgrading um The Hop
River Trail itself uh but the the fewest
people said you know we're we're all set
in terms of our open space and and
natural resources um most people believe
that more could be done more could be
could be
invested um we then grabbed um a
question from the longrange planning um
study that was done a couple of years
ago um back what I'm sorry
Eric correct correct so um where several
several um key Investments were were
listed developing a town center
establishing a Main Street um actively
marketing undeveloped rout six
commercial districts um Investments to
make 316 more bike ped friendly and um
Less on acquiring new open space and and
more on stewardship and maintenance of
existing Open Spaces um by far um and
again this was this was weighted from a
strongly agree to a strongly disagree
one through five weighted um and and by
easily the most um popular top priority
strongly agree was um Route Six Corridor
undeveloped commercial um property where
nearly 40% strongly agreed with that and
and combining strongly and agreeing um
that was nearly 70% or 65% if my math is
right on that um was by by sort of by
far the the most common and the rest
kind of fell into the middle range
um I'm sorry I have a question yes on
that last one yeah what was the on the
far right they weighted average what did
that mean so if you um so in that case
if you give a strongly agree a one and
agree a two uh and then you know three
four five um it
would then then it you know kind of
spreads out that way so if the average
is people are saying neither agree nor
disagree it would be a
three um and so the the the weighted
average anything less than three is
generally supported and so the numbers
that are closer to two or one are are
the are the most most strongly uh agreed
if that makes sense okay thank you so so
in this way I highlighted the lowest
number because that represented the
strongest
agreement
okay um
this one we sort of took a look at the
the categories of services that the town
currently provides Public Schools Senior
Services General government parks and
wreck Public Works and a transfer
station um and you know not not to say
any of these is unimportant but
generally speaking where do people's
priorities lie in terms of where they
want to see their their their tax money
being used and public schools um were
the the plurality and again the longer
bars present more answers um it was
interesting uh maybe not shocking uh
that most of the uh handwritten
responses which is to say the ones that
were at the Town Hall library and Senior
Center um were very very strongly
weighted towards senior services and and
much less weighted towards the um the
public schools which I think
unsurprisingly reflects the demographics
of the people filling out surveys in in
long hand rather than on on the
computers um but but by and large there
was a lot of support for uh the public
schools um and Public Works particularly
um with the rest sort of falling falling
in the
middle John can I make a comment on that
real quick sure I I'll I'll defer to the
chairman but that's fine with me oh go
ahead Andress okay so you know I looked
at the survey and I'm looking at the
public schools Ram's got a good reput
reputation and over needs a little bit
of help but the reason why I wouldn't
put Endo with schools as number one is
because because it's they're in pretty
good shape so I think that it's being
managed properly so I would look at
other things like senior services and
maybe maintenance as a something that's
a little bit more important than public
schools in my opinion that's an
interesting take that that it's
essentially you feel like it's kind of
in a good spot kind of taken care of RAM
is is that's interesting yeah and I
think that's I I'll be honest that's not
necessarily how I intended the phrasing
of it but I think that's an
interesting that's an interesting
Insight yeah thank you
um then we looked at some issues um
large number of issues that that
represented perhaps threats in the
future uh climate change changing
demographics aging infrastructure loss
of plate loss of sense of character
pandemic economic growth and so on um
and again from the sort of the one to
five most you know very concerned to not
concerned at all with that weighted
average and again um the if you look at
the column on the on the right the
lowest numbers represent the most
agreement or in this case the most
concern um so we had easily aging
infrastructure was the most common uh
real concern where people were very or
somewhat concerned um that's a number
under two which is unusual in surveys
like this and then affordability of
living in Andover was also a very
popular response um with with you know
strong majority saying that they were
very or somewhat concerned um so I think
you know a the the the the population
itself is aging and the infrastructure
around us is aging and and both of those
things um uh deserve a little bit of
attention um I'll stop there right
now CH Chad would can I U make make
another comment I'm sorry to be this
person I'm just an analytical person but
you know when you're looking at the
agent infrastructure and you're looking
at the affordability of living that goes
kind of hand inand right if you're
saying we have a population of of
retirees that of course they're going to
be concerned with affordability right
versus somebody like me I I think
endover has some of the lowest taxes
around so I'm you know for me it's not
really a concern because um it's it's
affordable for a young professional
myself but somebody who's who's retired
I would think that you know that would
be concerned especially as Retirement is
you know cost of living is is going up
in inflation and so on so I think that's
a that's an excellent point and uh we
we'll actually get in a couple of slides
to the the demographics of people
filling out the survey so you can you
can kind of see the the the span of
responses yeah and and the waiting um
towards towards senior responses frankly
I'm sorry Jed were you as we started out
you know we we discussed how Handover
has an aging population it is older you
know than uh than the state average and
and the older than most other towns uh
in Connecticut um and those people out
of fixed income they are are being you
know concerned with uh with the taxes
because uh you know Social Security is
supposed to go up what less than 3% this
year and uh yeah inflation is 17 so yeah
so well so anyhow the uh the the seniors
uh are concerned about the affordability
here and it and it is a big deal for him
so I just leave it at that okay uh and
then I'll go we we add had two
open-ended
responses um which is one is what is
something you will hope you hope will
happen in and over the next 10 years and
I did a a word cloud um the larger words
are the more
prevalent I'm trying to find a better
way to to to depict this because it you
know it catches words like Town um or
simple words like um you know and over
right Andover um senior housing and and
that that doesn't I'm trying to figure
out a better way to do this without
listing 200 something responses um but
so I may I may update this but you know
issues of of taxes and over Plaza we
have you know properties Plaza and over
Plaza um if you kind of combine some of
these words
businesses uh you know where it says
root a lot of those are roote six and
some people did the number some people
did the the word so word cloud is
imperfect but it was trying to capture
some ideas here well on that there were
you
know there were a lot of fragments and
phrases that didn't make additional that
didn't make sense to me like new
additional or families will continue
right will continue move uh so now if I
just focused on the things that were a
little more purple you know you've got
endover school business and seniors M um
Community um I don't know I share your
concern that that that uh didn't really
hit the nail on the head for what we
were looking for and and when when we
get done here we'll spend a couple
minutes with the commission trying to
find out you know what what are the big
priorities you we've made a lot of
progress we've got uh uh the senior
community centers done now I think uh
Eric's contivity program is uh got
momentum behind it that's going in the
right
direction um I've got some thoughts on
where are we falling a little bit short
in where we need to hope for but it
didn't show up on this chart so yeah um
if if the punchline is different than
what this picture
shows we've got to figure figure out how
to tell the story right yeah um I I'll
I'll I'll I'll spend a little time going
through the actual open-end responses
and see if there's a there's a better
way to to
depict um so a similar issue with when
we ask things that people are worried
about uh over the next 10 years and if
you look at so we have you know words
that stand out crime taxes Elementary
School businesses um you know I think
they do reflect some issues uh and we
have you know we have property taxes we
have increasing taxes live tax increase
um so you know I think this one maybe
slightly better reflects but there
there's there may be a better way of
depicting this so well and even on this
one you you you said crime jumped out a
little bit if you go back to the slides
on the what are the priorities or
concerns or whatever where you had a
bunch of stuff crime was the lowest of
the
bunch yeah right but but um
you know it's I think it's it's still on
people's minds even though they they
they might not have ranked it as high as
some of the other things yeah yeah John
how many responses were there to the
these
two
um good question I I think it was about
2third participation where people
actually filled something in um so my my
my rough estimate is is around 160 but
but I'm I I can check those numbers I
thought than that I was surprised how
many answers we got but yeah so how many
duplicates were were
there um there were there were very few
verbatim duplicates and that's part of
the problem with
um that was part of the problem with
with um the word cloud is is it fails to
capture something that's essentially a
an identical sentiment that might use
slightly different
words um and so because the the the word
cloud just just treats words as as
shapes you know it doesn't think of them
as
ideas
um so yeah um how many of them are
exactly the same I I I'm not I'm not
sure I will note that it didn't I don't
think it ended up on
here um a number of and it maybe just
because of the spelling and and the the
syntax but you know probably our most
surprising frequently cited word for
worried about was is roundabout or or
rotary I was GNA make a comment on that
that surprised that didn't pop in there
because I know Diane was out beating the
drum pretty hard on
roundabouts um yeah we we we did get a a
remarkable number of um similarly minded
uh alarmists let's say of of the of the
roundabout the roundabout
scorge um I think you had one particular
resident that's been beating the drum
about that um I'm not so sure that's
such a ground swell of
opinion it may just been everyone
everyone else sitting at that right
right person getting everybody wound up
yeah hey everybody at my table could you
write in roundabouts please um so I
wasn't gonna make a humorous comment on
that John but you brought it up so sorry
about yeah um and if it if it helps any
uh I just had a meeting this afternoon
in columia where we will hopefully take
some of the roundabout heat off of you
because the town manager and I were
going to be pushing for one at the at
the route 6 Route 66 uh interchange so
hopefully we'll we'll shift the shift
the do's eyes over over
Eastward um okay and then and then to
round out the survey we just asked a
couple of the demographics questions um
the the age age of respondents
um it basically you know it it split it
was it was basically you know adults um
we only had a few young adults um 18 to
29 and then relatively evenly split um
with slightly more in the 45 to 60 and
60 to 69 um demographics but you know if
you combine basically your 60 plus um
that was by far you know it depends on
how you slice it but that was by far the
the the largest group was 60
plus and
relatively well to do I think which
reflects um the the overall demographics
in and over but also you know sort of
wellestablished property owners um you
know if you combine basically over
100,000 um you're you're looking at the
majority more than 50% of your of your
respondent population was was uh making
over
100 and again reflecting and overs
demographic um nearly nearly all
homeowners or you know with or without a
mortgage
um very very few renters participating
but very very few renters in and over
period um so we'll go go through that
and I think I'll try to I'll can work on
cleaning up the um the wordcloud
presentation a little bit and then we go
into the actual vision statement I would
plan to and and the Planning and Zoning
commission we've we've gone through this
for a couple of months so I won't read
through but we'll
um I I at that presentation I will read
through the vision statement because I
think it's important to hear out loud um
and including the the six we envision um
sentences that kind of break out the um
specific topic areas again you know
quality of life affordable housing
conservation Economic Development
complete streets and climate change
becoming um the six thematic Keys which
then we will get into in terms of
chapter breakdown um and then I would
introduce this as again taking the the
the quality of life we envision
statement and breaking that down into
several of the of the topics schools
housing Recreation uh
government and so on um that will form
essentially the the the skeleton the the
major bones of um the plan itself and
then again breaking down these these six
statements and then and and basically
talking about so that this is where we
are we have our vision statement we have
our our structure and now it's going to
be a series of conversations to get into
the meat of those topics and and start
to build a list of goals and priority
actions um in each of those
areas and then we'd leave it to um an
open an open uh comment opportunity so
that's perhaps less brief than I had
intended but that's the a brief overview
of the of the presentation um and as Jud
said the the target if if it works with
everyone is um Thursday evening the 12th
of September
and I'll turn it back over to you J okay
so any comments in general from any of
the commission
members you know is it ready to go to
the public are there
things that don't reflect how we we
think that we should be
headed I think we did a great job job on
the we
envision we really kicked that around
for hours yep we
did I think that I think that I hope I'm
hoping for a for a a good a good uh
reception to some of that especially
after sort of reading it out loud
because I think it has some impact there
I
uh the only so when when I go through
all this the only thing that uh that
strikes me is we're not headed in the
right direction on is the housing you
know that's where I think our emphasis
needs to be going forward you know parks
and Rex we got a big project going for
the recreation Fields over there uh now
upgrading that Community Senior Center
done uh the the connectivity uh you know
big strides going forward and that it's
going to take a while but
uh I think uh you know we need some some
smaller low maintenance housing for
people to uh to make it more affordable
than what the big houses are right now
feel the same way Jad I think we really
need to push that think it almost needs
to like bring be brought to the
selectman every month I know you don't
want to hear there Eric but it's a
really big deal that has to be
pushed okay so you should bring it to
the selectman every month Well we I'm
I'm just I'm just throwing it out there
you know the that's that's something
that could be done so just so it we keep
it moving in some way I'm not sure how
but anybody on the commission doesn't
think that's that's where our Focus
needs to
be and I'm you know I want to hear if
that's what you
think you you really kind of have to
Define what are your goals for the
housing because I don't think
necessarily my goals and my Approach for
that line up with what the commission
thinks I mean my goal would be to push
very small housing units and push zoning
availability and push um Ada
units strongly in town and is that
really what you want I mean what do you
in and the the secondary question is is
the town willing to actually support it
because the reality is you cannot build
affordable housing in the state of
Connecticut without subsidies it just
doesn't work you know I mean Jim and I
sat down with a builder that's looking
at developing potentially a spot on
Bunker Hill Road um you know he's a man
after my own heart his interest is
building you know energy efficient
buildings but he was very UPF front that
you know he's looked at it a bunch of
times and said can he build small
starter homes and his answer is no in
today's climate that's just not you
cannot build that at a profit in today's
market so really what do you want I mean
and how do you wanna how do you want to
try to subsidize it what is it that you
want you
know not easy question I'm not saying I
got all the answers right those are
those are questions I think that me and
Jed were talking about that maybe John
John could
um you know put some emphasis
on yeah and and the you know and I think
I think we'll when we get into that and
again those those are going those are
discussions that are going to happen in
the the meetings in which we sort of
cover those individual topics um but the
answer is is I think often going to be
you know not all of the above but many
of the above there's not a silver bullet
you know we're not going to build little
tiny you know tiny Cottage cluster
communities around Andover and you know
walk away and say job done um it's going
to be a number of things and it's going
to be you know maybe some some tax
incentives on certain types of housing
maybe uh some regulatory changes to
encourage different types of housing you
know in engaging Town Town land it's
there's going to be five six seven
different things that that are going to
combine to address the issue it's not
it's not going to be a single
thing I guess I guess the other comment
I have before we leave this topic
is how do we advertise it you know uh
we're
essentially just over three weeks away
from doing this and that that time's
going to go by pretty fast uh I know
Eric you've been
successful at getting crowds to show up
at uh at your town meetings
um that's because they're mad what's
that that's because they're mad yes well
we yeah we can we need to figure out how
to tick some people off between now and
then yep um put put afford affordable
housing in
but yeah we had talked about that that
would uh
not affordable housing low income
housing low income housing take people
off that would get everybody to show up
um it would be nice to have a little ad
in the River East John kind of like we
did with the
uh
survey and
uh I know we we used the uh Town
communication system to advertise it
pretty good too
um so so that would be
good would be nice have some people show
up Jed make a flyer for it we'll use
the uh Community alert system we'll put
it on the town social media we'll put
something in the River East but you got
to develop the flyer for what you know
what it is you want to tell them um and
then turn it over to Kate and she can
she can get that out there you could
also consider since you're the chair of
the
commission having a conversation giving
Mike sinowitz of the River East a call
and ask them whether they would be
willing to do a quick story on it um and
you know especially if you gave him a
press release and made it as easy as
possible for him to publish something um
because they're pretty pretty lazy so if
you give them content they'll publish it
not I'm not saying that in a bad way I'm
just saying e you make it of them the
more likely it is you are to get what
you
want okay let me let me think about that
a little bit and uh we'll go from there
so yeah J if there's if there's stuff
that you want me to generate the the
flyer or whatever just yeah hit me with
a couple of the of the key points to to
to focus on okay I will happy to do it
that'll be my next project for my
position as a senior I think that even
putting something about increased
affordable housing even though if it's
not lwi income housing but you say
affordable I think you'll get more
people that way too because we're
looking for something that we can afford
yep um and then the other thing I wanted
to say was the town alert system I
thought that was going to be used for
the opening of the senior community
center we never got anything so I don't
know if that went out to everybody or if
that wasn't used then well you need to
check your registration because I
certainly got it yeah I think I did too
I didn't get it
in okay well then my suggestion is that
you may be on the emergency alert list
but not on the regular Communications
alert list okay maybe all right we'll
check okay well good job John putting
that together and
uh I hope we get some people to come uh
come and actually see
it that would be
good so uh next up on the agenda is uh
old
business property at P 70 Pine Ridge
Drive uh gym I'll turn that over to you
for a little update
Jim you're still muted if you're
talking yes uh background of this is uh
was a two lot subdivision at the end of
Pine Ridge Drive actually with one of
the Lots had entrance on Old Farms um
took quite a while to get through the
regulatory process involved the wetlands
Crossing um
two houses were to be were proposed and
one is substantially built and some
problems arose and were brought to my
attention um specifically the the house
that was built was deviated from the
approved plan in that it it was uh
largely the more land was was um cleared
and the the house was cited a little bit
differently and the
the drainage outlet for the roof leaders
was placed diff in a different location
than had originally been approved um
what is continues to be a problem right
now is there was a considerable amount
of fill that was placed off site on the
post property
um and um
became became a big issue and I've been
working with Joe Wagner the wetlands
agent
on the ens controls there was some
blowout on it Hill seems to be
contained um and
the outlet for the drainage was moved
back onto the the applicant property
that the house being built um but there
was a lot of concern about the deviation
from the from the plan
and obviously the offsite fill I don't
really have an approximation of that
that amount it's two two areas
um that were
basically cleared and
filled um one on the hillside and one
sloping off as well towards towards the
post both of them towards the post
um
and I was asked to put this on the
agenda because of concerns over the fact
that it differed the actual construction
differed from the
approval and and the Fallout from
it
so I'm going over my mind Jim uh
on on what what is the next step for
action on that
particular
situation well I mean
there Joe is is handling the wetlands
opponent
um he is aware that he's going to have
to
[Music]
move to to regrade to to move Phil um
and I'm going to need a some sort of
plan for
that and Joe as Wetlands agent will that
that will involve work in the the Upland
review area so that will involve the
white agent if not the the
commission um so would we expect a
modification to the approved plan to
come back before the commission uh
similarly to what we're working on with
the Gravel Pit
I don't I personally thought that they
fell under sort of just field
[Music]
adjustments is my
opinion I don't see where it would would
be coming back to the
commission okay I guess so we we had
mentioned we would have further
conversation on that but yeah I thought
you know and and again uh what what I
need to get myself smart M on is
apparently there can be a little bit of
a difference between
the plan that gets approved by the
Planning and Zoning commission and the
plan that gets approved by the building
official and what actually happens
and in this particular case I thought
the Delta was pretty
excessive um yeah and in in a manner
similar to the Gravel
Pit I don't think it's good for the town
to
have
the to set the standard
where it's okay to not follow the plan
and I I'm concerned that that's what
we're seeing I've seen it on smaller
extents a lot of different places but
these two were really egregious and and
I think we need to make sure that we're
setting the standard that the
town ought to
have or else we'll continue to deal with
these kinds of problems and understood
and and I'm I don't feel like spending
my time that
way so anyhow that's probably it uh on
where we are with Pine Ridge tonight and
uh more to follow on that at the next
meeting any other questions or comments
for Jim on that
one
okay moving on to uh the next item on
the agenda which is the filling of the
Planning and Zoning commission
vacancy and
uh to Pat Andreas and Don thank thank
you very much for for showing interest
in the commission um you know previous
to right
now I've never had more people
interested than I've had
openings so right this minute the
commission has the The Dilemma that uh
we can only choose one of you because
that's all the openings we have right
now good position to be in but
uh when people want to volunteer and
help out their Town I'd like toh give
each of you that opportunity and
unfortunately I
can't
um the term that the successful
applicant would be filling expires next
November you know when when Steve
Nelson resigned uh
for his personal reasons here couple of
months back um that's when his term
expired we've got a couple other people
so so the
uh whoever gets appointed tonight will
be up for election again if you were to
choose to continue on until uh further
um in the election next
November it's
uh fair to note that the there are some
training requirements for the Planning
and Zoning commission they're not very
big um I think the minimum requirement
is four and a half hours of training
every other
year you the state thinks that people on
the Planning and Zoning commission ought
to know a little bit about it and I
think that's a good idea too um and I've
done all the courses and and I think
they've been very helpful most most of
the training requirements every two
years the Connecticut Bar
Association holds a training session in
March on a Saturday it goes from maybe
9: in the morning till 4 in the
afternoon covers everything you need to
do to meet the
requirements um and I thought that those
training sessions were very good I I
think I've attended three of them now
and so uh they're very helpful
the way uh the way the selection process
is going to work and and there were a
couple of different ways that I could
have done
that but we need a motion for the
commission to go into executive session
which is essentially a closed hearing so
it won't be uh recorded and onto record
and other members of the public won't be
there and we'll invite the uh the
candidates in one at a time and the in
order that uh no candidate has uh the
advantage of listening to the other guy
answer whatever questions or give his
little Spiel on why he wants to be on
the Planning and Zoning commission and
that sort of
thing um je can I can I way in here for
a second yeah go ahead Jim um Don Denley
was here with me in my office on the
zoom meeting had to leave it a few
minutes ago a few minutes back um
indicated he'd be he had another
engagement indicated he'd be happy to
meet with commission U at any future
time if if if the position is not filled
this evening okay very
good
um so anyhow there'll be two of you that
one at a time we'll bring you in and it
be Patrick's first because you had your
application your letter of interest
first and Andreas you'll come in second
after uh after that uh and John will
help you get into the little breakout
room that the commission goes into so
that we can have that private
conversation so okay so Jed let me let's
be clear here I'm going
to uh pause the recording right now we
should still be recording okay sorry
that motion yep yep so
um and then we'll come after we've we've
talked about the two
applicants we'll come out of
session go back into the regular meeting
which is just like we just did with the
recording thing and any action we take
has to be taken in the public regular
meeting so we we won't take action out
in the executive session we'll we'll do
that uh back in the meeting so as soon
as we get done and it won't take very
long
we'll we'll uh vote on the
applicant D did
go ahead lean yeah um did you say that
we do or don't continue
recording once we get into executive
session we will stop recording we we not
in executive session yet I need to make
a motion and the commission needs to
agree to go into executive session
before we
can and to Just J just to be clear we I
when we do this um is it are you just
inviting the Commissioners themselves is
Eric invited is Jim invited am I invited
and and who's being left out so that
that will be in the motion I need to
specify who's going to attend and and it
will include you John Eric and Jim as
long as Don is no longer with him there
if Don was using Jim's computer we we
would not allow him into the execu
session but we'll cover that in the
motion I have that written out ready to
go but that's how that's how I think the
process is going to work did you have
another question
Leanne no okay very
good so do the uh candidates Pat and
Andreas any questions before we get
started there no questions okay very
good so I make a motion to enter
executive session discuss personnel
interested in filling the vacancy
created by the resignation of Steve
Nelson for the term expiring in November
2025 Personnel invited into the
executive session include all commission
members down administrator Town planner
zoning enforcement officers and each of
the interested parties one at a
time I'll second
that okay that was you Scott yep okay
okay thank you Scott any discussion on
the
motion just to note the time it's
8:38 okay yep and in when we go to
Executive session we will note the time
on there too yes thank you
lean any other
discussion so um I'm sorry oh you go
ahead and vote first yeah okay hearing
none uh I'll call for a vot Ann hi Scott
hi
Leanne hi Susan hi and I vote I as well
the motion passes
500 and an Marie even though you're not
Seated on the commission tonight you are
part of the commission and uh will be
able to attend the executive session
okay so I'm I'm pausing the recording
now
sorry Everybody by that little miracle
that I was talking about on getting Zoom
to work
uh caught up to me for saying that and
uh I I dropped off and and had to come
back yet so apologize for the
delay the host has asked you to start
your
video that was me Chad we'd like to see
you
oh okay very good yep sorry sorry about
that got everything
uh goofed up there but uh
um I see Andreas I'm looking for Patrick
uh there he is okay so we got both of
you guys here
um thank you both
for showing an interest in the Planning
and Zoning
commission
um you know we all thought both of you
were were Superior
candidates and as we said
uh at the onset breaks my heart that we
can only pick one but we can only pick
one and and so uh with that uh I would
uh
invite the commission to uh make a
motion to uh select
somebody okay I nominate Patrick DY for
the open position on Planning and Zoning
commission I'll second with that thank
you Scott any any
discussion hearing none I I will call
for a vote an hi Scott hi
Leanne hi Susan I I vote I as well the
motion passes
500 and before you go away Andreas um we
uh we thought you're right up everything
was uh just uh Superior we'd be pleased
to have you uh Patrick you know one of
the things that that we talked about was
when I I joined the commission I came in
as an
alterate uh learned a lot about how it
worked for a year or so before I became
a regular a commission
member um and I thought that was very
beneficial to
me I'm hoping that when we have another
opening either on the commission
or uh for an alternate or the election
comes and you put your name in the Hat
for a position that would you would
choose to do so you would uh
be absolutely a welcome addition to the
commission we just uh felt that with
Patrick's previous experience previous
working with several of the people here
um and the fact that it was right on on
the commission how could we let that
Talent get away from us again and so uh
we did and
uh no hard feelings it's all good makes
me want to resign right now to make a
spot for you Andreas uh really would but
but that wouldn't be not going to do
that either um so so that's that Patrick
thank you for your interest uh we uh uh
welcome you back to the Planning and
Zoning commission and uh um I I expect
that that working relationship that you
had in the past will will continue uh on
into the future thank you very much
thank you Patrick thank you
sir
um next
up new
business request for authorization of
minor revision to site plan for 90 lak
Road Dollar
General uh Jim turn it over to
you while we're waiting for Jim to
unmute himself Patrick I would seat you
right now but you have to get sworn in
by uh Carol yes sir and so we can't do
that but that's all right I should
probably I'll attend the rest of the
meeting so I make sure I'm up to speed
anyway very good thank you yeah you're
very welcome thank
you okay I received a request
from Dollar Tree to add
a at along the the route six facade
towards the the West end of the building
and there's no real provision in the
regulations that allow me to to Grant
minor revisions and it was suggested
that I come before the commission for to
seek
authorization to sign off on that what
can you repeat that again we missed that
what they asked for propane a propane
rack so it's propane
[Music]
tanks so it's a swap out swap out yeah
it's not
loading it's and I'm sorry Jim it's it's
basically just a it's a portable cage
thing it's not a it's not a permanent
structure no it's not
okay I I wasn't sure whether bring it to
the commission or not quite honestly I
just Jim and I talked about this a
little
bit and I'm gonna read
from our
regulations on
enforcement says the commission may by
resolution permit the zoning enforcement
officer to authorize minor
non-substantial deviations from the
approved special exemption special
permits
so when when Jim didn't know whether to
bring it to the commission or not I I
knew that we had the the power to uh
make it so that he could uh handle that
I think it is a minor
revision and
uh and so I will make a
motion to uh permit the zoning
enforcement officer to authorize minor
unsubstantial deviations from the
approved special permit for the Dollar
General
store in case of prop
think yeah that was a second from you an
yes okay any discussion on that motion
it it's just it's gas
tanks propane tanks yeah propane tanks
what size propane
tanks the standard size I don't know the
exact amount 20 pound 20 gallon whatever
you know you get on your barbecue grill
oh they're going to be selling them yeah
well they'll be it's a swap bring in
your empty one and you take home a full
one
no Eric has his hand up Mr chairman
oh
Eric I didn't know whether you wanted
other comments on this what I would say
is that I have no real objection to that
um has have you consulted with the fire
marshall number one um because that
seems kind of appropriate since you're
storing flammable liquids there
um secondly does it interfere with the
sidewalk in that location and does it
reduce it past the three foot width you
would require for handicapped
accessibility that would be my second
question and then if you decide those
things are satisfied you want to go
ahead and give him permission to do it I
would ask that you suggest to him that
you condition the approval on this of of
uh rectifying one of the things that
they did after they got site plan
approval and a CO which was put an ice
machine smack in the middle of what was
designated for cycle parking um because
they made that completely unusable for
bike parking because the only place to
like lock your bike up blocks the ice
machine um and since our regulations
require that applicants put in cycling
parking you should probably insist on
that if you're going to grant them
something extra and now I'll get off my
Soap Box thanks for that
[Music]
consideration to answer your questions I
did not I realized um as it came up this
evening that I should have checked with
the fire marshall I did not
um I'd be happy to do so it it will not
impede on the sidewalk traffic flow um
and I actually had um brought up the
issue they have a banner sign as well
that I was going to ask be eliminated
prior to moving forward with with the
propane tank swap
up I agree with Eric that moving the ice
machines uh ought to be uh done as
well so there going to be a place for
the ice machine
got to be a place better than right next
to the bike
rack I'll take a look at
it with
them but you're Jim so you're amendable
to the uh suggestions that Eric provided
there yeah I just I mean I know whether
you're comfortable making a motion with
the having the Fire Marshall approv
continued upon Fire Marshall approval
whether you'd like to see actual the
Fire Marshall weigh in it's your call
well I would like to see the Fire
Marshall weigh in but I don't think it
needs to
change you know we're we're turning the
matter over to you and I expect that you
would okay do do all those things that
should be done all the above yep okay
thank you
any other comments on uh on this
particular
issue and so uh I do think that the
discussion we had warranted bringing it
before the commission because those
were some good things to talk about um
but with I have a question of John if I
if I may John when you asked the
question about you question whether it
was portable were you implying that
maybe maybe it shouldn't have come to
site plan wouldn't impact the site plan
is that the way I took that or I mean
just just trying to understand you know
the extent of the proposed change it's
not it's really not a structural change
to the site plan right it's an an
impertinent you know item that can be
moved this way and that so it's it's not
it's not it's not like they're bumping
out the building it's it's a you know
yeah portable cage I mean I asked
because I respect your opinion I just
was curious if um yeah no I'm just I was
just wondering if if the if even the
request is applicable because it's not
actually structural right I got it that
that's why I POS the question
thanks any other
comments so if they if they come if they
have to change something on the outside
do they have to come to the commission
or
to Jim
to add or take away
from what's going on in the facade of
that
place yeah I think it really depends on
how you define sort of the the the core
elements of the site plan you know so
you know obviously if the building is
getting bigger or the parking lot is
rearranging and the the driveway is
going to a different place those are
fundamental changes to a site plan right
um you know this this is you know
something important that could you know
block the function of the building as
Kevin I'm sorry as Eric pointed out that
you know could block sidewalk so and if
it's meant to be there for a longterm
thing then then it functionally becomes
part of the site but so for instance if
a if if a tree dies and he wants to
replant it or you know offset a tree
five feet from where it shows on the
site plan that's not something that you
would necessarily force him to come back
for so it's it's kind of a a judgment
call on what's a significant
modification of the site plan and what's
not
but if it I think it if if it affects
the function of the the land use it
should probably given some consideration
so even though it's you
know it's it's essentially temporary
it's not it's not a physical part of the
building and it's probably only going to
be out there seasonal during grilling
weather probably you know April through
October or something like that
um it you know it it could affect the
function of the of the of the land use
so I think you know Jim is his instincts
are right to to bring it bring it to you
right right and they have to have the
same the correct amount of sidewalk area
also on top of that correct yeah there
there's a minimum minimum
width the sidewalk and that'll be
maintained yeah and again yeah that's
the the minimum width because but again
you know um the state had allowed uh
outdoor display you know during covid we
allowed you know restaurants to have
have meals outside and and and Retail to
do outdoor display that outdoor display
allowance has continued so you can you
know with with you know temporary
clothing racks or whatever can block
some of the the sidewalk but you
wouldn't you know on a temporary basis
but you wouldn't want to do it you know
in a way that that obstructs all all
flow
so again it's it's kind of a a temporary
versus permanent
situation any other
comments okay so again just for review
the the motion is to allow Jim
to authorize if appropriate the uh the
installation of the propane cage and uh
and handle that without further input
than what he's already got from the
commission and uh that's your motion
ched no I had the better motion earlier
on that was just to summarize it so you
remembered I think Marina will have
she'll she'll record it from the first
motion uh to get it into the
minutes if you want I can read the first
I can read the particular words right
out of the the uh zoning RS
again and rather than discuss it I just
will
so I make a motion to permit the zoning
enforcement officer to authorize minor
non-substantial deviations from the
approved special permit for Dollar
General in the case of a propane cage
U that's it and
I can't remember I think it was an that
seconded yeah so that's the motion
that's on the
table that's a good motion okay so uh
with that I'll call for a vote an i
Scott
hi
Leanne
I Susan I I vote I as well motion passes
500 Z
next
up is uh 8B receive application from
Veil soccer club and set public hearing
Jim okay I did receive an application
today um I have a substantially
completed checklist with that I do not
have site plans as of yet I did receive
a check um and I hope to be working
with the sakur folks to
uh to complete those PL to to draw up
those
plans to complete the
application and this specifically is is
for lighting on the soccerfield on
Riverside Drive Long Hill
Road okay and you'll get that posted
here soon so we can all take a look at
it yes I will is it fairly
straightforward application that uh we
should hold a public hearing next
meeting
yes um time timing is an issue for them
um it kind of they kind of let it go a
little bit I think in my opinion
um you know they' like to be able to
light the field for for practices yeah
at night I'd like to have reviewed the
application before we came to the
meeting today too but right there you go
they had all summer they had all summer
oh I know and I know you've been pinging
on them Jim so it's not like uh they
came up as a surprise but uh and I told
them a long time ago yep I know you've
been working with them as well Scott so
um but be that as it
may in an effort to uh to have uh to
support the veil soccer club and uh with
that support the town of Andover because
I guess they uh they do provide a little
income for us
uh I'll make a motion that we uh hold a
public Hearing in conjunction with
our next meeting on I think it's
September
17th
second okay thank you an
it was Leanne this time Leanne okay
thank you
Leanne
um any
discussion Jim I could be wrong but I
think Veil is v a l e it is you're
correct I I put that on the agenda
before I had the
application it's vla VA correct
any other
discussion hearing none I'll call for a
vote an i Scott I
Leanne hi Susan hi I vote I as well
motion passes
500 next up is the approval of the
minutes from the public hearing and the
regular meeting conducted on July 16
and did anybody have any
comments
on the meeting
minutes let's GNA do both of them
together because they're all on one
sheet of
paper did uh somebody uh was going to
make a comment
Leanne yes Leanne I think it's I'm
looking at it I'm trying to look at it
um now I think it's maybe
6B there's just an apostrophe that's in
the wrong place it's the word applicants
yep
okay any other comments
hearing none I'll make a motion to
approve the public hearing minutes and
the regular meeting minutes from the
Planning and Zoning Commission on
Tuesday July 16
2024 amended uh paragraph
6B second line where we put the
apostrophe in the right place on the
word
applicants second that thank you an any
other comments or
discussion hearing none I'll call for
vote an i Scott hi
Leanne hi Susan I abstain because I
wasn't there okay and I vote I as well
the motion passes 40 one was Susan
England
abstaining and just for everybody's
information uh certainly you do not have
to abstain because you weren't at the
meeting if you read the minutes and and
we're we're comfortable that there was
nothing sticking out like a sore thumb
but certainly abstaining is is a good
path to either options acceptable
next up is correspondence Jim anything
there
none okay coming on to administrative
reports
uh oh you put me first this time well we
didn't have a Inland Wetlands meeting so
I've got nothing to report um I look
forward to the next meeting where we
have a discussion on the the Pine Ridge
subdivision and uh I'll let you know how
that goes over there
but that's it for me Jim you're
up okay um I had was on vacation for a
few weeks so I have an abbreviated um
time period here to to report on there
are a number of properties that are for
sale that have generated a lot of a lot
of question a lot of inquiries a lot of
a lot of interest um including a number
of well one home on the lake and another
another property somebody's looking to
do a tear down and and uh I just wanted
to point this out because it's
interesting that Andover lake is Andover
is now a becoming a tear down
Lake I don't think there's been that
many in the last few years just seems to
be a little seems to be a few more
um um I've also let's see had brought 38
Lakes sided compliance on a blight
ordinance it get a complaint on wood
chips at the church which they just sort
of appeared over at the end of the
parking lot a lot of a lot of w chips
not uh
and that they're really on the edge of a
a flood plane in wetlands area and I
referred the matter to to Joe Wagner who
contacted the church and was assured
that would be taken care of um so I feel
comfortable about
that that's pretty much all I have but
I'd be happy to entertain any
questions do you is it appropriate for
you to share with us the address on the
lake because I walk around Lake and I
have not seen any for sale signs up okay
one of them is five
Sunset okay the other was 268 which I
think has sold it was recently purchased
and now it's now they're interested in
tear down I
think I'm meeting with them meeting with
the representatives on
Thursday
268 I think it sold a few months ago 268
or
368 I have 268 268 okay yeah I am
familiar with that house now um it sold
the the family inherited it from the
parents so it had a probably title
transfer but
um
okay he could solve that very easily Jed
just right into the zoning regulations
the maximum house size don't allow
anybody to build a house bigger than 750
square feet you're done no more MC
manions the lot isn't much bigger than
that so so I guess uh that'll come to
pass as
well it can't be very big because A
lot's
not um any other questions for
Jim okay
John uh in interest of time I think most
of my report was covered in the in the
PowerPoint presentation another
discussion
um yeah nothing nothing further for me
at this time I have a question for John
what was the a talk that you had with a
a builder where where on Bunker Hill you
said um that was with myself that was
Eric and I okay yeah that was not me
sorry where so who who was that Eric a
builder
I don't know the guy's name that's not
relevant to
me the property was on Punker
Hill
yep and you're being tight lipped about
this uh I don't know the what partial
was it it's the one
the the guy that used to own Midstate
excavation the Zimmerman property it's
property guy name property with the
house The Farmhouse and 37 acres of land
Joey
Zimmerman yeah
yeah yeah sorry I couldn't think of his
last name I only hired him a couple
times but I'm old you're being
elusive no I just have a
terrible any other questions for John
in the interest of time yeah I didn't I
didn't know the guy's name either yeah
okay
um next up is commission discussion or
miscellaneous and I've got nothing for
that
one
anybody J yes
Leanne um I have a question about what
you just said a few minutes ago to Susan
about abstaining from the minutes yep um
I've heard that said before fairly
recently and I've always thought that
people are supposed to abstain unless
they listened to the public I mean not
the not just public hearing there might
not even have been a public hearing but
listen to the
recording because and this this you may
be right it may be the law or or
Robert's Rules or something my point is
that unless you done
that I I've seen and I've seen people do
what you just said if you think that
it's probably accurate or the person
taking the minutes always does a good
job or something but my concern again
whether it's a real thing or not is that
the person really doesn't know what
transpired and I think that's what Susan
was saying she can't attest to what
happened so she abstained which is what
most people do sometimes people will
vote anyway I understand that I just uh
I do think that if somebody like you
mentioned has routinely attended the
meetings looked at the the minutes
reviewed the the video of it I would
have no problem with that person and
it's just you know how comfortable that
person is on whether or not they're in a
position to vote it it's not improper to
vote on the
minutes it's all also proper to obstain
so I just wanted yes to let everybody
know that that option was available if I
if I could there there there is a
distinction between uh voting on minutes
and voting on applications if you
haven't familiarized yourself with the
record and the recording you certainly
shouldn't if you miss a meeting you
shouldn't vote on an application if
you've missed some of it and didn't
familiarize but minutes are sort of a
different issue it's a little bit of a
lower bar
I see it because it it really in my
experience never used to be done that
way in other words certainly somebody
would say for the record if you if they
missed a meeting somebody would put
themselves on the record saying I
listened to the recording these days you
can see many things on
YouTube so again I just my point is that
to be
safe unless somebody's done that you
really don't know that what you're
what you're voting on is what actually
happened true yeah it's my opinion I
agree I like to be safe nope I
absolutely I just wanted to point out
that uh if you felt that you understood
the issues uh that were going on and had
done your homework like a lot of people
do when they miss a meeting I know
Leanne you always watch those things
when you're not here and and if you if
you chose to vote I would be absolutely
comfortable with
that but that's I know I'm still waiting
for the board of selectman meeting from
eight days ago the minutes aren't even
up yet that's not our issue but that's
just an example of something else I'm
trying to watch yeah
okay very
good and I think most people would
normally abstain it's just easier
but but would be okay to do it the other
way um any other commission discussion
on any other
topics hearing none we'll move on to
public
comment and I guess the only one from
the public here is you
Patrick h on hey here I am
Y no anything for us tonight before you
leave uh
nope okay um I just asked that I be
invited to the rest of the meetings
until uh I get uh officially on board
and well I'm going to go swearing on
next available chance but let me know
you got till the 17th of September okay
I don't want to overstep and jump in
until I'm official so yep I got you and
uh and thank you for your willingness to
serve we look forward to having you on
the commission thank you very much and
um looking forward to serve thank
you um next meeting date and venue so
the next meeting is going to be uh
public hearing at 7
o'clock we'll try to do two public
hearings
there and then uh followed by a regular
meeting and the venue if I can pull it
off will be a hybrid meeting where we
meet in the new senior center community
center and I'm going to try and see if
we can set up in that little Lounge area
I think that's big enough for a
commission meeting the Acoustics might
be a little better
um and I think by the 17th we would be
in a pretty good shape to uh pull that
off where would the public
be uh the public would be in that little
room too I think it's big enough for now
oh the public thing on the 12th of
September well no I mean if you're going
to have a hybrid meeting you have to
make accommodations for the
public how many people can you really
seat in there well I'll I'll go check it
out that uh I don't expect many from the
public to be there but you never can
tell yep so we'll check I I know uh
there was a bit of a reverse Echo with
all the people in the uh the big
room when we had the open house and uh
trying to make the Acoustics
good
um who will let you know
okay next up is uh thanks for making it
a hybrid meeting say again
Leanne uh thanks for for planning to
make it a hybrid meeting yep well I
think youo John
unless
significant pressure were put to
attendant person will always choose to
be remote as well and I think that's
reasonable as well as our
attorneys I'll I'll be there in person
for the public information session on 12
yep
um anything
else with that I'll make a motion to
adjourn second that
thank you
an um any discussion no call for a vote
an i Scott I
Leanne I Susan I can I vote I as well
motion passes
500 and I appreciate everybody uh
attendance and participation tonight
little longer than normal next month
might be a little longer than normal too
we'll see how it goes but thank you
everybody good night okay